Yes, can you please introduce yourself please?
My name is Raqel Smith.
Mera naam Raqel Smith hai.
Can you tell us where you were born and yeah, can you tell us about what it was like growing up there as well?
Mai Pakistan mein baida hui, Jannamwala, Nasti, Faisalabad ki.
I was born in Pakistan, Jannamwala, near Faisalabad, district Faisalabad.
What was it like growing up there?
It was very nice. We had a small family.
My father was in England. He was in army first and then he came to England to work.
While I was with my mother, grandmother and brother.
So we were living there happily.
How old was you when your father was travelling to England?
We came to this country when I was fourteen.
What kind of games did you play in Pakistan?
I remember playing in the streets, sort of an open place.
Because even in the houses we have a yard where we play to get the children to come around.
And we played in the streets as well.
In our time it was very safe to play there.
Have you got a favourite memory of your childhood?
My favourite memory could be my grandmother being there and friends coming around to play.
And we used to sit together, listen to grandmother's stories and having good fun really.
Because there was no TV, only radio at that time.
Is there a certain story you can remember from your grandmother?
Not really. Only remember just talking about different things.
Is there an event or gathering that really stands out to you that you had while you were still in Pakistan?
I remember Christmas times, because I'm Christian.
So Christmas time was a big thing.
And because my father was abroad we were known as a well-off family.
And he would send money and Christmas time all the people in our nearby would get together in our house.
And little presents would be given to them and it would be a really joyful time.
Mixing with children. And it wasn't a massive big presents.
It was small presents and some food given and things like that.
So we weren't spoiled about giving of large big things.
So then you're 14 years old and you're travelling to the UK. What made you decide to come to the UK?
It was my father invited us over. The mother, my brother and myself.
It was hard in a sense. Mother was very excited. She's meeting her husband and going abroad.
I don't understand why I wasn't happy.
Because I was leaving everything I knew behind. I think all the aunty, uncles, all the friends behind.
But it was good as well. Happiness as well.
But still you were sad as well deep down living in the country.
Was there anything you were expecting? Did you have a vision inside your mind of what the UK was going to look like?
Not really, no. Being 14 years old it was quite hard to just think why we have to leave and go.
And when we came here, going to the school was the biggest thing.
I didn't know the language. Even though I went to school in Pakistan, I only moved to India.
We just started doing English at my age. We started in class 6 I think.
We started English. And then I knew to read and write, but to speak there was no chance.
Especially when you can speak when you come here, accent and everything. It takes time.
So that was a big culture.
So you travelled by plane coming to the UK?
Yes, we came by plane.
Can you remember where you landed?
Heathrow. Straight to Newport.
And been in Newport over 50 years now.
Wow. That's amazing. Was there any particular reason why your father was in Newport?
He was actually in Bradford because he had friends there and there were more industrial factories around there.
But he had a friend from Genoa where we were from, in Wales.
And he invited him over from Bradford. He said, come and join us here. Now your family is coming.
Come here so we can meet together. So that was the reason.
And of course, is there a certain memory that really sticks out to you when you arrived into Newport or around the time that you were settling in Newport?
Yes, there are a lot of memories. The particular one is changing of clothes.
From Pakistani clothes we had to wear English clothes like in school, skirts and things. That was very daunting.
It was very strange after being covered, we had to wear those clothes. That was one of the memories that really sticks out.
That's something. That's the first time I'm hearing that actually, someone mentioning that.
Because you wouldn't think as much how clothes do pay a factor because that's what you're wearing at home.
That's what you're wearing when you play everywhere. Everyone in Pakistan is coming here.
It's not everyone. It's just my father was a thing who got mixed with the culture.
And being a Christian, we didn't have restrictions like got to be covered.
Even though in Pakistan there was no difference. That's what you call national costume.
Here to him, national costume was what English people were wearing. Got to be with the society.
So when did you start learning more about the language?
I went to school here. So I started learning the language there.
There were special classes and there were Pakistani children as well.
With the teachers I would communicate small words by writing down and answering back written down.
They would write down for me. There was no other help around.
So how about friends? Did you start growing friends as well or more that you have been settled in the side of Newport?
Yes, we made friendship. My main friends were Pakistani people because of the language.
And some of them are still my friends. We kept on as family friends after.
Where in Newport have you lived actually? Since you've been here for 50 years.
I live around the hand post area, you know, Rusker Road.
We moved around a bit. I think the very first time we came, the first home was in Thill.
My father was there and from there we moved to Mendy. We lived in Mendy a year.
And then the rest of my life I've been in the hand post area, up and down streets.
You're actually quite high up now actually going up the hand post.
Does that mean that you used to go to Bellevue Park and things like that as well?
Yes, I lived in Bellevue Park and still do. It's one of the things, really memories are there.
Because from school we would walk to Bellevue Park before we go home.
I went to Dufferin High. Bellevue Park is quite an important park in my life.
After coming here, did any of your friends from Pakistan or other family members join you in Newport?
No. Because it wasn't easy to get visas and things.
How about you travelling to Pakistan? Have you been able to?
My mum and my husband used to go more often. My husband doesn't come yet.
He came too early. When I got married I went back. I did not go before that.
Yes, we got a big connection at this moment in Pakistan. We started a charity in a village nearby where I'm from.
Which is running a school for poor children in a small village.
And they needed a church as well so we built up a church.
School is our responsibility. I got all the community here involved in it.
It's good really well. We got a big connection there.
We go up and down and with the media now we run the video calls.
So it's really important. When I was young I didn't have that connection.
Only stories I will get is when mum will go back or my husband will go back.
But now I've been a few times.
What does that connection feel like for you to have now?
It's that connection you didn't have when you were younger.
What does it feel to have that now and to also provide it for other people?
It is really satisfying the connection.
It's keeping in touch with your roots.
Plus we're trying to change lives of people.
We've got a good life here and those children did not have any education, no school.
And it is really satisfactory that you can make a change in people's lives.
When we were asked to do something for the village,
I'm not from the village or my husband is not,
it was just a pastor who reached us and asked us if we can help.
Because they think people living abroad are rich and they can do anything.
But we said we will go back and find out and let you know.
So we took up this responsibility and God is always there to help us through.
Because fundraising is not a easy job.
And we are getting there and we got the building which is really lovely.
And children seeing their behaviour running around from the street to being here,
sitting down to get some education, this we're changing.
For the country, these children and changing their families,
it's a really satisfying project.
And like I said, all my friends, everybody I know is always willing to help.
The fundraising, anything they can do, it's always there.
It's amazing to hear and that togetherness that you just mentioned of your friends
and people that are around you here, they're also assisting you in fundraising.
This is without any religion, without any restrictions.
We are just friends. We try to work for this community.
And speaking of work, what type of jobs have you had while you've been here in Newport?
I have worked in shops, like shop assistants.
I think little time in the factory as well, the production factory.
But my main job has been in school as a language support worker and an under-five development worker.
And I think that's where my real heart is to see children progress.
And get into life. Education is the only way, I believe, to change people, to give you progress.
And I've done a lot of work. Since I retired, I'm a voluntary worker.
And can you tell us a bit more about your family in terms of your husband,
and how that came about, and then growing up from there as well, in terms of you being married?
Yes, I was married at the age of 31.
And it was arranged, married.
And we have lived happily since then. It's 47 years now.
We've got three girls who are very successfully educated and settled in their life.
And six grandchildren. It can be helpful when they're together.
So then balancing your work and family and being in this environment as well,
what kind of other things in terms of groups or anything like that did you start being exposed to?
Or did you start joining any groups while you were here in Newport?
Basically I joined the groups when I retired.
I was looking for a way to go, what to do. I started going to coffee and laugh at Eaton Road.
And from there a friend, Sugra, introduced me to Age Alive.
And Age Alive is a very successful, very friendly, satisfying, it's like a family group now.
Because I've been going to it till about ten years.
So I can make up places. And I'm a secretary for the group.
Once you're with Age Alive, you always got a job there. They get you to do everything.
Roy who runs Age Alive is a person who gives his 100% to it.
And he expects everybody else to give their life to it.
But I do try my best and try to do what I can.
But it is a group that everybody should join. It's so satisfying.
It's given people a home. Like some people go nobody.
Once they join Age Alive, you've got a family there.
We were really friends with everybody. Everybody's willing to help.
Fantastic. Thank you. Thank you very much. I don't know if there's anything else that you would like to share at all.
That's all really. Yeah.
Fantastic. Thank you very much.